What is diabetes?
Diabetes, the most common disorder of the endocrine (hormone) system, occurs when blood sugar levels in the body consistently stay above normal. It affects more than 30 million people in the U.S. alone.
Diabetes is a disease brought on by either the body's inability to make insulin (type 1 diabetes) or by the body not responding to the effects of insulin (type 2 diabetes). It can also appear during pregnancy. Insulin is one of the main hormones that regulates blood sugar levels and allows the body to use sugar (called glucose) for energy. 


Pre-Diabetes
Condition when the Blood sugar levels that are higher than normal, but not high enough to be classified as diabetes is known as prediabetes, or impaired glucose tolerance. While people with prediabetes usually have no symptoms, it’s almost always present before a person develops type 2 diabetes. However, complications normally associated with diabetes, such as heart disease, can begin to develop even when a person has only pre-diabetes.

Once type 2 diabetes develops, symptoms include unusual thirst, a frequent need to urinate, blurred vision, or extreme fatigue can occur.


Type 1 Diabetes
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the insulin-producing cells of the pancreas (called beta cells) are destroyed by the immune system. People with type 1 diabetes produce no insulin and must use insulin injections to control their blood sugar.
Type 1 diabetes most commonly starts in people under age 20, but may occur at any age.


Type 2 Diabetes
With type 2 diabetes, the body continues to produce insulin, although insulin production by the body may significantly decrease over time. The pancreas produces either not enough insulin, or the body is unable to recognize insulin and use it properly. When there isn't enough insulin or the insulin is not used as it should be, glucose can't get into the body's cells to be used as energy. This glucose then builds up in the blood.

Gestational Diabetes
Hormone changes during pregnancy can affect insulin's ability to work properly. The condition, called gestational diabetes, occurs in about 6% to 9%of all pregnancies.

Pregnant women who have an increased risk of developing gestational diabetes are those who are over age 25, are above their normal body weight before pregnancy, have a family history of diabetes.


What Are the Symptoms of Diabetes?
The symptoms of type 1 diabetes often occur suddenly and can be severe. They include:

Increased thirst
Increased hunger (especially after eating)
Dry mouth
Frequent urination
Unexplained weight loss (even though you are eating and feel hungry)
Fatigue (weak, tired feeling)
Blurred vision


The symptoms of type 2 diabetes may be the same as those listed above. Most often, there are no symptoms or a very gradual development of the above symptoms. Other symptoms may include:

Slow-healing sores or cuts
Itching of the skin (usually in the vaginal or groin area)
Yeast infections
Recent weight gain
Numbness or tingling of the hands and feet
Impotence or erectile dysfunction

With gestational diabetes, there are often no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they might include:

Increased thirst
Increased urination
Increased hunger
Blurred vision

Pregnancy causes most women to have to urinate more often and to feel hungrier, so having these symptoms does not always mean that you have gestational diabetes. But it is important to get tested, because high blood sugar can cause problems for both you and your baby.
 

